JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
Together, we're going to start a
new energy
revolution.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Trump
starts the
rollback of Obama era clean
energy policies,
in a move that he says will
create jobs and
energy independence.
Then: Top Democrats demand House
Intelligence
Chairman Devin Nunes recuse
himself from the
investigation into Russian and
Trump ties
after allegations of
coordinating with the
White House.
And Syrian refugees fleeing war
face new challenges
in Turkey, where political and
economic upheaval
offer few a stable home.
MALCOLM BRABANT: They have no
real access
to state services and are
treated like second-class
citizens.
They may be safe from war, but
they and their
children are exploited and
vulnerable.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: From the
president today, the
first salvo against his
predecessor's climate
agenda.
Instead, he's launched an
aggressive campaign
he says will help the coal, oil
and gas industries.
John Yang begins our coverage.
JOHN YANG: With coal miners
looking on at
EPA headquarters, President
Trump took action
to undo most of President
Obama's climate
change legacy.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
Perhaps no single regulation
threatens our
miners, energy workers and
companies more
than this crushing attack on
American industry.
JOHN YANG: He signed an
executive order targeting
more than a half-dozen major
regulations.
The biggest target?
The Clean Power Plan to restrict
greenhouse
gas emissions at coal-fired
power plants,
the centerpiece of Obama's
global warming
policies.
BARACK OBAMA, Former President
of the United
States: The idea of setting
standards and
cutting carbon pollution is not
new.
It's not radical.
What is new is that, starting
today, Washington
is starting to catch up with the
vision of
the rest of the country.
JOHN YANG: It's been on hold
while coal states
and the energy industry
challenged it in court
as an unconstitutional power
grab.
Today's order mandates a review
of the Clean
Power Plan, lifts a moratorium
on new coal
leases on federal lands, starts
a review of
reducing methane emissions in
oil and natural
gas production, and launches an
assessment
of rules governing hydraulic
fracturing, also
called fracking, by oil and gas
drillers.
During the campaign, Mr. Trump
slammed the
Obama administration for waging
a war on coal
and vowed to bring back mining
jobs.
DONALD TRUMP: Today, I'm taking
bold action
to follow through on that
promise.
My administration is putting an
end to the
war on coal.
We're going to have clean coal,
really clean
coal.
JOHN YANG: But coal mines have
been losing
jobs for many years because of a
range of
factors, including automation
and competition
from cheap natural gas.
Environmentalists warned that
the president's
action raise questions about
whether the United
States can meet the obligations
under the
2015 Paris climate agreement.
In a statement, the head of the
Sierra Club
said: "President Trump's
sweeping order is
the single biggest attack on
climate action
in U.S. history, period."
The group vowed an all-out
fight.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We will hear from
voices pro
and con on President Trump's
action today
after the news summary.
In the day's other news: The
U.S. commander
in Iraq now says there's a --
quote -- "fair
chance" that a U.S. airstrike
played a role
in killing scores of civilians
in Mosul.
It happened on March 17.
But Lieutenant General Stephen
Townsend also
voiced doubt that the weapons
used could have
collapsed an entire building.
Meanwhile, an Iraqi general
claimed the airstrike
actually hit a tanker truck
loaded with explosives
that ISIS fighters were driving
toward Iraqi
troops.
YAHYA RASOOL, Spokesman, Joint
Command Operations
(through translator): It is a
new tactic being
used by the members of this
terrorist group,
using big car bombs against the
troops that
impact the civilians to inflame
the public
and to convey a wrong message to
the world
that the joint forces of the
international
coalition are behind the killing
and bombings.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Amnesty
International charged
today that coalition forces are
not taking
taken adequate precautions in
the battle for
Mosul.
From Russia today, a warning:
The Defense
Ministry in Moscow says that
U.S. naval patrols
in the Black Sea are a potential
threat to
Russian security.
The Black Sea is bounded by
Romania, Bulgaria
and Turkey, as well as Ukraine
and Russia.
U.S. American warships took part
in NATO exercises
there last week.
Thousands of people in
Northeastern Australia
spent a long day waiting out the
fury of Tropical
Cyclone Debbie.
The storm pounded the coastal
region for hours
with heavy rain, towering seas
and winds up
to 160 miles an hour.
It tore up trees, ripped up
power lines, and
left nearly 50,000 people in the
dark.
Back in this country, a sex
abuse scandal
involving the USA Gymnastics
Organization
took center stage at a Senate
hearing.
Hundreds of women have come
forward to say
they were sexually assaulted or
exploited
by coaches, trainers and a team
doctor, Larry
Nassar.
One of his alleged victims,
Olympic medalist
Jamie Dantzscher, tearfully
shared her personal
story.
JAMIE DANTZSCHER, Olympic
Medalist: Many times,
the abuse took place in my own
room, in my
own bed.
Worse, he abused me in my hotel
room in Sydney
at the Olympic Games.
When I first spoke out about my
abuse at the
hands of Dr. Nassar, I thought I
was the only
one.
I was disbelieved and even
criticized by some
in the gymnastics community for
bringing this
disturbing issue to light.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The former head
of USA Gymnastics,
Steve Penny, resigned under
pressure earlier
this month.
A group of U.S. senators is now
pushing a
bill that says groups overseeing
Olympic sports
must immediately report sexual
abuse allegations
to police.
A federal judge in Detroit
approved a plan
today to replace water lines at
18,000 homes
in Flint, Michigan.
It's part of a settlement over
lead contamination.
The deal calls for work to be
done by 2020.
It could cost nearly $90
million, with the
federal and state governments
splitting the
bill.
And on Wall Street today, stocks
moved higher
on a survey that showed consumer
confidence
at its highest in more than 16
years.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained 150
points to close at 20701.
The Nasdaq rose 34 points, and
the S&P 500
added nearly 17.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
more on the
president's decision to roll
back environmental
regulations; the House
Intelligence Committee
chair responds to calls for him
to step aside
from the Russia investigation;
life on the
U.S.-Mexican border under the
watchful eye
of Border Patrol; and much more.
One of the major promises of
President Trump's
campaign was his pledge to roll
back much
of his predecessor's plans for
coping with
climate change.
Today's executive order laid out
a path for
doing that.
We invited the administrator of
the EPA on
the air tonight, but he declined
our invitation.
Let's hear from a leading
lawmaker who supports
these moves.
He's Republican Senator John
Barrasso of Wyoming,
the country's number one
coal-producing state.
He chairs the Energy and Natural
Resources
Committee.
I talked to him a short time
ago.
And I began by asking how these
moves will
change the American energy
landscape.
SEN.
JOHN BARRASSO (R), Wyoming:
Well, I think
it was a bold and decisive
action by Donald
Trump.
I think is going to be helpful
to energy independence
for America, energy security for
our country,
and certainly for jobs.
That, to me, is the key driver.
When I think of energy -- I'm
from an energy
state, Wyoming -- I think of
energy security
for our country, economic growth
and environmental
stewardship.
And that's how we have used over
the 125 years
that Wyoming has been a state.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You mentioned
jobs.
As you know, a number of
skeptics are saying,
well, many of those jobs just
are not coming
back.
It's due to factors other than
what the EPA
did, the environmental rules
have been.
How many jobs do you think will
come back
due to this?
SEN.
JOHN BARRASSO: Well, I think,
across the country
and over the next number of
years, I'm talking
hundreds of thousands, if not
millions of
jobs in the energy sector.
Look, energy is called the
mastery resource
for a reason.
It powers our country, it powers
the economy,
our military.
Energy is a force multiplier.
It's an instrument of power.
And we can get a lot more done,
I believe,
with a barrel of oil than you
can with a barrel
of a gun.
So, energy can also be used as a
geopolitical
weapon.
We need it all.
We need the renewable energy.
And we need the non-renewable
energy.
And we can't kid ourselves to
say that we're
going to be able to power this
country and
this economy with just solar
panels and windmills.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You also
mentioned energy independence,
but, again, I hear skeptics
saying, well,
the U.S. is already moving
briskly in the
direction of energy
independence, that that's
already happening.
SEN.
JOHN BARRASSO: And we want to do
more of that.
You take a look how Vladimir
Putin uses energy
as a weapon, a geopolitical
weapon.
When we export energy, we export
American
influence overseas.
As I travel around the world, I
know that
there are people that want to
buy energy from
America.
I have had that discussion in
Japan, in Taiwan.
I have had that discussion with
our NATO friends.
They want what we have in
abundance.
And we are a world energy
superpower.
And after today, we're going to
be able to
act more like that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator, what
also -- also,
let me ask you about the
argument being made
that people in the energy
industry realize
that it's fiscally responsible
to have clean
energy, that that is what the
American people
want, and that by doing what the
president
is doing today, he's turning the
clock back,
and that the American people,
it's not something
the American people really want?
SEN.
JOHN BARRASSO: Well, the
American people want
affordable energy.
And clean energy is a big part
of that.
If you take a look at what's
happened in the
United States with emissions,
our emissions
have been dropping over the last
15 years.
They are down significantly.
We don't see that in China.
We don't see that in India.
But America has been leading the
way in reduction
of emissions, new technology.
We are, I believe, very good
stewards of the
land, of the environment.
We do it in Wyoming.
We have done it for a long, long
time, and
we're going to continue to do it
in the future,
because that's who people on the
ground want
to make those decisions, want to
live in clean
places, and that's the way we do
it at home.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But what you're
saying is,
emissions are improving, they
are being reduced.
But won't some of these changes
the president
is making today, by doing away
with a number
of restrictions and regulations,
move the
energy in the opposite
direction, away from
clean energy?
SEN.
JOHN BARRASSO: No, I would say
just the opposite.
It's the technology and the
innovation that
we have had here at home that
has resulted
in these reductions in
emissions.
Remember that President Obama's
clean climate
plan, that's something that has
been stayed
in the courts.
And he's made promises that even
the environmental
folks who look at this from a
scientific standpoint
say the impacts of something
like the Paris
accord would be over the next
100 years negligible.
So, I think it's important to
focus on our
economy, on jobs, on getting
America back
to work.
I was in Wyoming just yesterday.
Last week, I was in a little
mini-mart store,
and somebody came in guy and
said to the guy
in front of me in line, how are
things going?
He said, great, we're hiring
again.
Those are good signs for our
country that
the economy is picking up,
moving ahead.
And energy is a very big part of
that.
But we need it all, we need the
renewable,
we need the non-renewable, we
need the nuclear,
we need it all, coal, oil, gas,
uranium.
We need it all.
And we're going to use it all to
power our
economy, as well as the country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: One final thing,
Senator.
The point was made that these
changes the
president wants to make are not
going to happen
immediately.
It's going to take months, even
years to really
largely or completely undo the
clean energy
moves by the Obama
administration.
How long do you think it will
take for this
to take effect?
SEN.
JOHN BARRASSO: Well, I think the
impact in
terms of the optimism that
result of what
the president did today is going
to be immediate,
because what we know is the
regulations by
the Obama administration, they
have been very
expensive, time-consuming,
burdensome.
And to know that that relief is
coming and
those very expensive regulations
have been
lifted is going to be, I think,
really a good
thing, and people are going to
feel that.
When you take a look at what's
happened with
this decision today, it's this
giant step
forward and we're basically just
try to get
back into balance.
We all want a clean environment.
We want to make energy as clean
as we can
as fast as we can in ways that
don't raise
cost for American families.
President Obama's approach has
been to add
to the expense.
And I believe that President
Trump's approach
has been to add to our economic
freedom and
opportunity.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator John
Barrasso of Wyoming,
we thank you very much.
SEN.
JOHN BARRASSO: Thanks, Judy.
Thanks for having me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now let's
hear from the
prior administrator of the EPA,
who essentially
led much of President Obama's
efforts during
his second term.
Gina McCarthy is now a fellow at
the Institute
of Politics at Harvard's Kennedy
School of
Government.
She first shared her reaction to
the announcement.
GINA MCCARTHY, Former
Administrator, Environmental
Protection Agency: Well, it's
great to be
here with you, Judy.
And my reaction is that it's
pretty disappointing
and a little bit embarrassing to
have signed
that executive order.
But there's a lot of time in
between here
and actually undoing the legacy
of President
Obama on this.
And I want people to understand
that reality,
in terms of where we're going,
it's going
to be a difficult slog for this
administration
to undo the great work that we
did the prior
eight years.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, President
Trump is saying
this is all about bolstering the
energy industry,
bringing jobs back that he
issued have been
decimated by the unnecessary
rules and regulations
and restrictions during the
Obama administration.
GINA MCCARTHY: Well, Judy, we
have heard that
tired story for a really long
time.
And I know that, since EPA has
been around,
we have reduced air pollution 70
percent,
while we tripled the GDP.
And I think nobody in this
country is really
willing to go back to a time
when the air
was polluted and the water was
polluted.
And we don't have to for jobs.
We certainly know that,
particularly when
it comes to clean energy.
The reality is that clean energy
is fiscally
responsible today.
It's being chosen by many states
and utilities
and mayors.
Already, that is where the
investment is heading.
That's where jobs are.
We know that the solar industry
is growing
12 times faster than the overall
economy.
So, if you really want to do
something for
the business community and for
jobs, why aren't
you investing in clean energy
and doubling
down on what we proposed?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, how does
that square,
though, Gina McCarthy, with what
President
Trump is saying?
He is saying what has happened
with this so-called
Clean Power Plan that you and
President Obama
helped to institute is that jobs
that have
been lost.
And he's talking -- he said --
at one point,
he said today no single
regulation has threatened
miners more than that one.
GINA MCCARTHY: Well, I think he
has to look
at the history of the coal
mining industry,
and not try to produce rhetoric
that gives
them comfort.
What they really need is support
in the transition
that's already happening, with
or without
the Clean Power Plan.
We know that the industry has
been struggling
for awhile.
The simple fact is that it's not
competitive
now.
That's why it's not successful
in the market.
That's why you see companies,
mining companies
going out of business.
So, it's time to get real with
those people
and offer them support they
need, but not
simply say that climate change
isn't happening
or that EPA is taking away those
jobs.
I mean, let's look at the
popularity of this
proposal when it goes out.
I know that 70 percent of the
people in this
country understand that the
climate has changed,
and they are looking forward to
us regulating
utilities to make sure they're
not polluting.
And that is certainly a
significant number.
In fact, it's twice the
popularity of this
president.
And so let's look at how people
react to it.
I think people know that it's
all about the
future, not about looking at the
past, where
we have to go with jobs.
And none us want to leave any
community behind.
But you're not going to do it by
sending signals
that are simply a signature on a
page.
There's a huge amount of work
between what
we did to build our clean energy
future and
what it's going to take to
actually meet the
promises of this executive
order.
It's lots of hard work, many
years.
It's denying the science.
It's developing facts that don't
exist.
And so I'm pretty confident
that, despite
this signature, the Obama legacy
on clean
energy will be strong at the end
this and
any administration, because
that's where the
world is going.
That's where U.S. strengths
should be.
That's where we should be
investing and innovating.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What about the
many lawsuits,
Gina McCarthy, that have been
filed by different
states against the EPA, against
you, the president,
when you and President Obama
were in office?
The argument is made that that
says that you
just -- for all the good
intention, that you
didn't fully appreciate the
impact that these
restrictions would have on real
people, real
lives, real jobs?
GINA MCCARTHY: Well, I think the
thing we
need to point to, again, is,
what is reality
here?
I know that many of the states
that sued EPA
saying that these levels were
unrealistic
to achieve are already achieving
the reductions
that we were going to require in
2022.
And they are achieving them
today, because
we did a very good job of
outreach in understanding
and educating ourselves about
the energy transition
that was already happening.
We knew that renewables were
getting competitive
in many states.
We knew that energy efficiency
was available
and opportunities to reduce
energy demand.
We also knew that inexpensive
natural gas
was continuing to compete
against coal, and
compete successfully.
So, we never expected this to be
the complete
answer, Judy.
We never pushed it beyond where
we thought
the energy world was heading.
And right now, as I said, you
are seeing states
achieving levels in 2022.
How bad could our rule have
been, how unreasonable
could anyone think that is, when
we are already
there in so many states?
The simple fact is that many
states sued us,
again, as a symbolic gesture.
And what you need to look at is,
where are
utilities spending their money?
What is fiscally responsible
now?
What's available to them?
What are they already doing?
And if you look at it in
reality, you will
see that they're investing in a
low-carbon
future already.
And what we really need to do is
continue
to provide opportunities for
lower-cost, clean
energy moving forward, and we
will meet our
obligation to our kids' future
to address
the challenge of climate change
in a way that
will keep our energy sector
strong and reliable.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Gina McCarthy,
who is the former
administrator of the
Environmental Protection
Agency, thank you very much.
GINA MCCARTHY: Thanks, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We return now to
Capitol Hill,
where last week's collapse of
the effort to
repeal Obamacare and ongoing
drama over the
investigation into Russian
connections with
the Trump campaign have dealt a
blow to the
majority party.
Our Lisa Desjardins reports.
LISA DESJARDINS: In Congress,
another tumultuous
day, with more questions for
Republicans than
answers.
REP.
DEVIN NUNES (R), California: You
guys get
so many opportunities to
interview me, whenever
there is something to report.
LISA DESJARDINS: In particular,
for House
Intelligence Chairman Devin
Nunes.
His Democratic counterpart on
the committee,
Adam Schiff, has now publicly
called for Nunes
to recuse himself from the
investigation into
Russia and possible ties to the
Trump campaign.
Nunes sidestepped the question
today, implying
he will stay.
QUESTION: Are you considering
stepping down?
REP.
DEVIN NUNES: Look guys, go ask
-- I mean,
I have no idea what they're even
talking about.
So, go ask, go ask the other
side.
QUESTION: So, does that say
you're not considering
any change, not stepping down?
REP.
DEVIN NUNES: What's the purpose?
I mean, I'm -- I don't
understand your question.
LISA DESJARDINS: This after
Nunes told the
White House, before telling
others in Congress,
that U.S. intelligence agencies
inadvertently
spied on people close to the
president.
Then today, in The Washington
Post, allegations
that the White House tried to
block former
Acting Attorney General Sally
Yates from talking
to Nunes' committee about
Russia.
The Post pointed to a Justice
Department letter
written late last week telling
Yates her testimony
might be privileged and the
White House should
decide if she could testify.
The White House insisted it
never blocked
her.
SEAN SPICER, White House Press
Secretary:
We have no problem with her
testifying, plain
and simple.
The report in The Washington
Post is 100 percent
false.
LISA DESJARDINS: But Yates has
not testified
yet because Nunes canceled the
hearing, saying
he needs more background.
Also, late today, Nunes said he
will not tell
others on the Intelligence
Committee where
he got his information.
House Speaker Paul Ryan was
asked today if
Nunes should step aside and if
he knew Nunes'
intelligence source.
REP.
PAUL RYAN (R-WI), Speaker of the
House: No,
and no.
LISA DESJARDINS: Others were
less sure.
Senate Republican Lindsey
Graham:
SEN.
LINDSEY GRAHAM (R), South
Carolina: If he
is not willing to tell the
Democrats and Republicans
on the committee who he met with
and what
he was told, then I think he
lost his ability
to lead.
LISA DESJARDINS: Today was also
Republicans'
first day back since the
dramatic failure
to pass their health care bill
and their decision
to move on to other issues.
That was Friday, but, today, a
reversal.
House Republicans said health
care reform
is no longer dead.
REP.
MO BROOKS (R), Alabama: The
message is, we
are going to revisit health
care.
QUESTION: When?
REP.
MO BROOKS: I got the impression
that it was
fairly immediate.
LISA DESJARDINS: That from those
in the conservative
Freedom Caucus who blocked the
bill.
REP.
MARK MEADOWS (R), North
Carolina: Well, it's
too early to tell.
But, I mean, obviously,
everybody wants to
find a way to get this passed.
And we're going to work real
hard to do that.
LISA DESJARDINS: And from other
conservatives
outside the group.
REP.
BARRY LOUDERMILK (R), Georgia:
The American
people want it done.
We want it done.
The game didn't end on Friday.
We just took a halftime.
LISA DESJARDINS: An abundance of
intention,
with an absence of specifics.
Speaker Ryan said Obamacare
cannot stay as
it is, but, as for exactly how
Republicans
do that:
REP.
PAUL RYAN: I'm not going to put
a timeline
on it, because this is too
important to not
get right and to put an
artificial timeline
on it.
LISA DESJARDINS: Ryan
acknowledged timing
does matter in one way, that
insurers will
have to make decisions soon.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Lisa joins us
now from
the Capitol.
So, Lisa, let's bore in a little
on this change
of heart about whether they're
going to go
back to health care or not.
The president and others were
saying Friday
no.
Now it sounds like, as you
reported, they
are saying, we are going to move
ahead.
Is everybody on board, all the
Republicans
on board with this?
LISA DESJARDINS: They came out
of an extraordinary
conference meeting today, Judy,
all sounding
very unified.
But the issue is, there aren't
specifics,
there's not a plan.
And a side issue, Judy, is some
Republicans
insist that this future health
care motion,
whatever it becomes, should be
Republican-only.
Others, the moderates, want to
work with Democrats.
They want to craft a compromise
bill across
the aisle.
And we heard President Trump and
saw him tweet
about reaching out to Democrats
over the weekend.
They have not figured out what
they want to
do.
I think, Judy, I can't stress
enough how raw
the emotions are for Republicans
here on the
Hill today.
And this is a group that used to
be the vote
counting group.
They used to operate in
tangibles.
But now they're talking about
intangibles
like hope and promises, and they
don't yet
have a plan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, so, quickly,
Lisa, what
does the calendar look like?
What does it look like they can
realistically
do?
LISA DESJARDINS: Well, if
they're going to
tackle tax reform, they have got
to get right
to it, because they want to try
and get that
done before the August recess.
And that could be very
complicated, even more
complicated now, given the
dynamics after
the health care lack of a vote.
And, Judy, actually, in just one
month, we
have got a major deadline.
That's for government funding,
April 28.
And talking to Republicans
today, they admit
they need Democrats' help on
that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, Lisa
Desjardins
at the Capitol, thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, Lisa
Desjardins
at the Capitol, thank you.
Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": The
Supreme Court
weighs in on how schools educate
students
with disabilities; and Turkey
becoming more
hostile to Syrian refugees.
But first: President Trump today
faced questions
from both parties over who will
pay for his
promised wall on the U.S.-
Mexico border.
He's already pledged to hire
thousands of
new immigration agents, whose
jurisdiction
extends deep into the U.S.
itself.
For Americans on the Southern
border, interactions
with Border Patrol vary.
Some see an occasional
inconvenience, others
a daily torment.
William Brangham has story.
CARLOTTA WRAY, Arizona: Right
now, it looks
more like a war zone.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Carlotta
Wray's commute
has changed a lot over the past
few years.
She lives in Arivaca, a sleepy,
no-stoplight
town 25 miles from the
Arizona-Mexico border.
You drive in any direction from
here, you
will pass surveillance towers
and border agents
on patrol.
Checkpoints run by Customs and
Border Protection,
CBP, stop traffic in either
direction out
of town.
CARLOTTA WRAY: When the
checkpoint was only
temporary, I thought it wasn't a
big deal,
until it got serious.
They never left.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Welcome to
life along the
U.S.-Mexico border, where
security has been
ramped up significantly since
9/11.
In response to drug trafficking
and illegal
immigration, as well as fears of
terror, the
federal government has hired
more agents and
installed more checkpoints.
But Border Patrols
infrastructure extends
well into the U.S. itself.
And it often sweeps up American
citizens,
regardless of whether they have
crossed any
international boundary.
Research has shown that four out
of five drug
arrests by Border Patrol
actually involve
U.S. nationals.
And it's not just drug arrests.
Residents like Carlotta Wray,
who's an American
citizen born in Mexico, say they
are frequently
stopped and harassed, especially
because of
their skin color.
CARLOTTA WRAY: You can see it.
You can feel it.
There is racial profiling, no
doubt.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: CBP doesn't
release information
about the number of checkpoint
stops it makes.
But Wray's troubles go beyond
the profiling,
to what she says is the broader
militarization
of her whole community.
CARLOTTA WRAY: I have seen
Border Patrol agents
in my backyard running after
something with
their pistols in their hands or
guns.
And that's not what I want my
property for.
I want it for my kids, my
grandkids to be
safe there.
In all these years that I live
in this town,
I have never been afraid of
anyone that walks
through the desert and stopped
at my place,
because he needs help or he just
needs water
and food.
But I have been afraid of the
Border Patrol.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: America's
Border Patrol
agency was created in 1924 to be
responsible
for securing U.S. borders
between points of
entry.
But its jurisdiction actually
extends far
into the country itself, up to
100 miles from
the border.
Within that zone, its agents can
stop, detain
and search any person if an
agent suspects
a crime is being committed.
About two-thirds of Americans
live under Border
Patrol's authority.
But, in practice, it's the
people along the
border who are impacted most
directly.
VICENTE PACO, Spokesman, Border
Patrol: Every
major route of egress into the
United States
along the border is going to
have one of those
checkpoints.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Border Patrol
spokesman
Vicente Paco grew up in a border
town himself.
He took us on a tour of the
border near Nogales,
Arizona.
What would you say to people in
these neighboring
communities who appreciate what
your mission
is and the job you're tasked
with, but they
still say that the impact on
their community
is too much?
VICENTE PACO: I like to say that
I'm a community
member myself.
I grew up in a border town.
And I saw how illegal activity
affects people
that I went to high school with.
People that I grew up with ended
up in jail
because they were recruited by
transnational
criminal organizations to bring
illicit cargo
across the border.
SCOTT RAFTERY, Rancher: The
border check stations
can be bothersome if you have to
drive through
them every day.
They stop you, they hold you up
for a little
bit.
But I think, overall, they're a
necessary
evil.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Scott Raftery
is a rancher
and horse trainer near Arivaca.
He says he's recovered a
half-dozen dead bodies
from the land he works.
He once came home to an armed
standoff between
border agents and border
crossers on his own
property.
SCOTT RAFTERY: There's people
out there crossing
our borders undetected,
unstopped.
And, somewhere, we have to hold
the line on
them.
And if it's not at the border,
it's somewhere
close to border, because, once
they get north
of here, they're gone.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Three hundred
miles away
in Yuma, Arizona, Sheriff Leon
Wilmot also
supports stronger security.
The former Marine has spent 32
years in the
sheriff's department, and today
works closely
with federal agencies like
Customs and Border
Protection, Immigration, Drug
Enforcement,
even the FBI, all to fight crime
in his city
of 90,000 residents.
He says the hassle of
checkpoints and an increased
police presence is a small price
to pay to
protect residents' safety.
LEON WILMOT, Yuma County
Sheriff: If you live
on the border, you have to
understand that
you're going to have to deal
with one issue
or the other.
Which one makes more sense?
Public safety, to me, is the
government's
priority.
To me, that's a no-brainer, or
if it's going
to prevent somebody from being
the victim
of a homicide.
If we can do something to deter
folks from
dying and keep those illegal
drugs out of
our country, to me, that makes
sense.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And for those
caught in
the dragnet?
LEON WILMOT: If you're abiding
by the law,
then you have nothing to worry
about.
If you got a ticket, that's
because you broke
the law.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But it's not
so easy for
Esteban Duarte.
He lives in Yuma with his kids,
and he's a
substance abuse counselor.
He says, every time he goes
through a checkpoint,
he ends up in what's called
secondary, where
you're subject to being held and
searched.
ESTEBAN DUARTE, Substance Abuse
Counselor:
They do ask me for documents.
They keep me sitting in a room
for a while.
And they just -- sometimes,
they're really
rude.
They tell you to open your car,
run you like
a little dog.
Either you sit, or I'm going to
smack you.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Richard Edgar,
who is a
defense attorney in Yuma, sees
this frequently.
RICHARD EDGAR, Defense Attorney:
You talk
to a federal agent 100 percent
of the time
when you want to leave Yuma
County.
You're going to be talking to
him, answering
questions about your
citizenship.
You're going to be answering
questions about
where you're going.
They have the authority at any
point in time
to put you into secondary.
And, in secondary, that's where
they really
get into it.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Edgar says 80
percent of
his cases are drug-related
offenses from the
nearby checkpoints.
A 2013 report by the Center for
Investigative
Reporting found that Border
Patrol around
Yuma had some of the highest
rates of arrests,
not for human trafficking or
immigration violations,
but for possession of small
amounts of marijuana.
RICHARD EDGAR: But if you drive
by those checkpoints
as many times as somebody down
here does,
you're going to see cars on the
side in secondary
being ripped apart.
Now, if they find drugs in 10
percent of those,
is it worth it?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Esteban Duarte
isn't sure.
He says of course he wants his
community and
his kids to be safe from crime.
But he worries that the hand of
Border Patrol
comes down too hard.
ESTEBAN DUARTE: From a father's
perspective,
I don't want anything going on,
on the streets
that's going to harm my family.
, But on the other point of
view, I could
look at it as, why did they
label me for?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Americans
living along the
border will likely experience
even more scrutiny,
as the Trump administration
orders an additional
5,000 Border Patrol agents.
For the "PBS NewsHour" I'm
William Brangham
in Yuma, Arizona.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we have more
from our trip
to the border online.
We visit a soup kitchen for
recently deported
migrants in Mexico near Nogales,
Arizona,
where we talked to a husband and
father who
has tried to cross the border
into the U.S.
several times.
Now: a Supreme Court ruling that
could have
a significant impact on special
education
in schools around the U.S.
John Yang is back with that
story for our
weekly education segment, Making
the Grade.
JOHN YANG: Amid all of the big
news last week,
this stunning ruling may have
been overlooked.
The court unanimously ruled that
schools must
give students with disabilities
the chance
to make meaningful and
appropriately ambitious
progress.
That could set the bar higher
for more than
six million students nationwide.
Lisa Stark of our partner
Education Week has
been covering this story and
joins me now.
Lisa, thanks for being here.
LISA STARK, Education Week:
Thanks, John.
JOHN YANG: What was this case
about?
LISA STARK: Well, the heart of
this case is
really, what educational benefit
do schools
need to provide to these
students.
It's a case out of Colorado,
involved a boy
named Drew.
He has autism.
The case was filed when he was
10.
He's now 17.
His parents pulled him out of
the fourth grade
in the Douglas County Public
Schools -- that's
right outside Denver -- because
they were
concerned.
His behavior was deteriorating.
And they also felt that he
wasn't really getting
any educational benefit, as
required by law.
They put him in a private school
for autistic
kids, and then they sued the
district.
And they said, look, if you're
not providing
the appropriate education, you
need to pay
for this private school.
Well, the lower courts all ruled
against the
family.
And, in fact, the 10th Circuit
ruled, the
appeals court ruled that that
school district
only had to provide something
that was merely
more than de minimis, in other
words, a very
trivial benefit to the child.
The Supreme Court, as you
indicated, totally
rejected that.
It was a unanimous decision.
The court ruled 8-0 that, in
fact, education
programs must be appropriately
ambitious,
in light of each child's
circumstance, and
they must be challenged.
The kids have to have
challenging objectives.
JOHN YANG: So, what does that
mean for the
classroom?
LISA STARK: Depends on the
student.
If you're a student who is in a
regular classroom,
maybe you have ADHD, you have a
minor learning
disability, you're with every
other student,
it means that you need the
supports to be
able to pass that classroom,
that classroom
and that grade, and move on with
your fellow
students.
If you are a more challenged
student, like
Drew, who has autism, and might
be in a special-ed
class, well, then that program
is tailored
to what you can accomplish.
But, again, as you say, it must
be meaningful
progress, challenging progress.
JOHN YANG: And what are
disability advocates
saying about this ruling?
LISA STARK: Well, they are
applauding this.
They see it as a big win for
disability, for
these kids, these nearly seven
million kids,
as you said.
They do think it's a
game-changer, that it
raises the bar.
The attorney for the family,
Jack Robinson,
told me that, for the first
time, there's
a national standard that
determines really
what is the educational benefit
these kids
need?
And drew's mom, Jennifer, she
told me that
she hopes school districts will
work more
closely now with parents, will
be more willing
to do something that is right
for their children.
Also, we should say that these
advocates think
this is just going to empower
parents, that
it gives them more leverage to
demand more
from school districts.
JOHN YANG: How are the districts
reacting?
LISA STARK: Well, they say this
isn't a game-changer.
They believe that most districts
are already
providing a very good education
for these
students with disabilities.
They say that they meet this
higher standard.
I did talk to Sue Pudelski.
And she is with the School
Superintendents
Association.
She did tell me that this may
hold districts'
feet to the fire a little bit
more, that they're
going to have to justify these
plans they
set out for all of these
students, what is
called an IEP.
She said, so that may give
parents a little
wherewithal to come in and say,
what's this
program and how is it working?
JOHN YANG: And for parents of
children like
Drew, with this ruling, what do
they need
to know?
LISA STARK: Well, as I
mentioned, every district
needs to set up what is called
an IEP -- it's
an individualized education
program -- for
each of these students.
And parents have to sign off on
this.
And, in fact, that's happening
right now.
So, this is sort of fortuitous
timing, if
you will, because these are set
up in the
spring for the next school year.
Parents have always been told,
pay careful
attention, see what the district
is going
to do, ask a lot of questions,
find out what
resources you're getting.
Now they can also walk in with
this Supreme
Court decision and say, hey,
here are the
standards that you need to meet
for my child.
JOHN YANG: Lisa Stark of
Education Week, great
to see you again.
LISA STARK: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It was on a visit
to the huge
refugee camp at Zaatari in
Jordan today that
U.N. Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres called
for more international support
for Syrian
refugees and for the countries
hosting them.
To the north of Syria, Turkey
now hosts 3.5
million Syrian refugees.
President Erdogan there says
70,000 people
with special talents will be
granted citizenship.
But a Turkish charity is urging
the government
to grant citizenship to all
refugees, to stop
exploitation, and to prevent
violence erupting
between Turks and Syrians.
Special correspondent Malcolm
Brabant reports
from Western Turkey.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The Hajeeras
from Northeastern
Syria are creating a new shelter
after being
evicted from their tent by
paramilitary police.
They live with the constant
worry of being
moved on again.
Aid workers say raids on
unofficial refugee
camps are part of the strategy
to stop migrants
from reaching Europe.
In an attempt to avoid
discovery, these people
are staying out of sight in
semi-derelict
farm buildings.
This rough farmland was home to
about 300
refugees for the winter.
But the Syrians were cleared out
and told
to find accommodation in hotels,
houses or
apartments.
The farmer objected to us
filming, called
the police, and followed us for
several miles
as we looked for people willing
to talk.
MARIAM IBRAHIM, Syrian Refugee
(through translator):
Mariam is my name, Mariam.
I'm 30 years old, Mariam
Ibrahim.
Our life is awful.
We have no source of income.
Nothing.
Only God is by our side.
We have no money.
We are on our knees.
We're struggling to survive.
We just work to live.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The landowner
is charging
Mariam $100 a month to pitch her
tent.
She is alone with her five
children and has
little choice.
MARIAM IBRAHIM (through
translator): They
say living in houses is better
for you than
living in tents.
So, how do we feel?
I mean, we are crammed on top of
one another.
I don't have the means or help
or money to
live in a house.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Despite barely
earning enough
to support her family, Mariam is
trying to
send money to Syria for her sick
husband left
behind in an area where Kurdish
forces are
fighting Islamic State.
There's irregular work in the
fields around
the town of Torbila (ph).
Here, they're harvesting leeks.
The Syrians say adults might get
$10 for a
12- to 14-hour day.
That's about half the statutory
Turkish minimum
wage.
The children earn far less.
BOY (through translator): In
Syria, they are
all dead or living with death.
BOY (through translator): We are
better off
in Turkey compared to Syria.
There's no fighting.
We are comfortable here.
AHMED MOHAMMED KHALAF, Syrian
Refugee (through
translator): I came to Turkey to
work in the
orange orchards or flower
fields.
The daily pay is low, like 75
cents.
BOY (through translator): Now we
are working
and coming back from rock
bottom.
But I think of being in school
and learning
everything.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Refugee
supporters say stories
like this are replicated all
along Turkey's
Aegean Coast, the gateway to the
Greek Islands.
The three million Syrians
sheltering in Turkey
are inhabiting a precarious
twilight world
where they have no real access
to state services
and are treated like
second-class citizens.
They may be safe from war, but
they and their
children are exploited and
vulnerable.
Little wonder that so many of
them wish to
cross this sea to Europe for a
better life.
In September 2015, Izmir was
smuggling central.
This mosque was full of people
angling to
buy a passage to Europe.
But after the E.U. signed a $3
billion deal
with Turkey to stem the migrant
flow, the
crowds have vanished from the
courtyard, and
also from this cafe, which was a
rendezvous
for traffickers and their
clients.
The Syrians are doing what's
necessary to
survive on the wrong side of the
tracks.
Many of their children work in
leather or
textile sweatshops.
These young Syrians were on a
lunch break
from a textile factory and would
only confirm
they have been working for
years, despite
being underage.
Under new Turkish laws, Syrian
children with
identity papers are allowed to
attend state
schools.
But aid agencies estimate that
only 5,000
out of 22,000 eligible children
in the Izmir
area have taken up that right.
The rest are believed to be
working.
Mohammed Sali Ali founded a
charity to help
Syrian refugees.
MOHAMMED SALI ALI, Charity
Founder (through
translator): When the parents
fled Syrian,
they had some money in their
pockets.
But, after a few months, they
ran out of money.
They don't have any income.
They don't have any work or
trade.
So they had to choose between
begging and
sending the kids to work.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Turkey is
hosting more refugees
than any other country.
Aid agencies warn of growing
racial tension.
And in the back streets of
Izmir, there's
clear resentment from Turks
about the impact
refugees have on the labor
market, at a time
when there's 12 percent
unemployment nationally,
a seven-year high.
OMER YESHIL, Turkey (through
translator):
The Turks should first think
about their own
people.
Retired people are starving.
I can't even find work with the
minimum wage.
We, as Turkish citizens, can
hardly make a
living.
Do you understand?
We are worse off than the
Syrians.
ADNAN KIRBY, Turkey (through
translator):
At the moment, because the
Syrians' employment
went down a lot, they work on
the cheap.
And because they work for low
wages, the situation
for Turkish workers is bad now.
MAN (through translator): They
are our guests
here.
Why should we complain?
One day, when things are OK
again in their
own land, they will go back.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But Zahir
Bhatah is planning
to stay, along with his
4-year-old autistic
son, Anver.
He didn't dare take a rubber
dingy to Greece.
ZAHIR BHATAH, Syrian Refugee:
The sea is very
dangerous.
My son is very small.
And he cannot swim.
I have many friends who drowned
in the sea.
So I am get so scared to travel
to Europe.
So I decided to stay in Izmir.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Bhatah used to
be a heart
surgeon in Damascus.
In Izmir, he worked as a baker
for a while.
He's applying for Turkish
citizenship under
President Erdogan's new
initiative.
ZAHIR BHATAH: I think it's
better for me to
find a chance to work as a
doctor in Turkey.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Other refugees
are taking
Turkish lessons to improve their
chances of
assimilation and employment.
Last year, at Ramadan, the
Turkish president
promised citizenship for all
refugees from
Syria and Iraq, but had to
retreat because
of widespread opposition.
Now an aid group called Bridging
People says
that Turks should remember what
happened to
hundreds of thousands of theirs
countrymen
when they migrated to Germany
for work after
the Second World War.
Burcu Senturk, a spokeswoman for
Bridging
People, argues that Turkey
should copy the
Germans and grant the Syrians
citizenship.
BURCU SENTURK, Bridging People:
When they
come here, they are not
refugees.
They are people with their
families and hopes.
And I think, in due time, they
will be settling
down in Turkey with their unique
stories and
unique qualifications.
And this is why we need to
embrace all of
them.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Senturk argues
that Turks
will benefit from such a
proposal.
BURCU SENTURK: I think that this
will protect
many Syrians and other nations'
refugees in
Turkey if they become citizens.
And since the Turkish workers
and the other
nationalities' workers will be
working in
the same conditions, it will
also decrease
the potential for racism and
violence between
the people.
MALCOLM BRABANT: While the
president may be
sympathetic, campaigners say
they need to
convince lawmakers from the
ruling party that
the alternative to citizenship
is potential
strife in the future from
stateless disenfranchised
people, especially the young,
like the 8-year-old
who says he was clawed by a
Turkish teacher.
Children selling tissues, the
underage fruit-picker
banned from playing soccer on a
farmer's land,
they face an uncertain future.
But the heart surgeon is
optimistic that his
hosts will judge that his skills
are worth
harnessing and make him a Turk.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Malcolm Brabant
in Izmir.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: a most
unusual take on
ghost stories, Abraham Lincoln,
and the dead.
Jeffrey Brown has this latest
addition to
the "NewsHour" Bookshelf.
JEFFREY BROWN: February 20,
1862, 12-year
old Willie Lincoln has just died
of typhoid
and been interred at Oak Hills
Cemetery in
Washington, D.C.
His grieving father, the
president, visits
at night.
So far, all true.
But in the new novel "Lincoln in
the Bardo,"
it's the cemetery's ghostly
inhabitants that
tell us of the visit and its
consequences.
This is the first novel by
George Saunders,
widely acclaimed as a short
story writer,
including his most recent
collection, "Tenth
of December."
And welcome to you.
Nice to see you again.
GEORGE SAUNDERS, Author,
"Lincoln in the Bardo":
Nice to be here, nice to be
here.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, this is a
ghost story,
very human ghosts, right?
They don't even think they're
stuck.
They don't even know they're
dead.
GEORGE SAUNDERS: They don't even
know yet.
Yes, they're stuck, and they're
stuck kind
of in the condition they were in
at the moment
of death.
So, if they were worried about
something or
feeling shortchanged or in love
or in hate,
they suddenly are in this other
place, and
desperately trying to stay
there, which they
do by repeating their
grievances.
JEFFREY BROWN: Which makes them
very, very
human, very, very alive.
GEORGE SAUNDERS: They're just
neurotic and
free-floating, yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: We should say the
bardo is
a Tibetan term for a transition?
GEORGE SAUNDERS: Well, actually,
we're in
one now.
We're in the transition between
birth and
death.
But the one that people often
know about is
the transition between the
moment of death
and whatever comes next, so
reincarnation
or heaven or hell.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, this
particular bardo is
a cemetery, as I said, a real
one, not too
far from here in Washington,
D.C., right?
And you tell the story through
voices, a chorus
of voices.
Why that approach?
GEORGE SAUNDERS: The first thing
I wanted
to not do was tell it in a way
that made death
and this experience seem banal
or manageable.
So, my approach to fiction is to
kind of just
to go in there moment by moment
and try to
always make some sparks.
And, in this case, it meant kind
of telling
it from a strange angle that
might even give
the reader a little struggle in
the first
10 to 15 pages.
But I thought, you know,
whatever happens
after this life, it would be
really strange
if it was what we expected.
So, I wanted to kind of simulate
that in the
book.
So the reader is a little
destabilized, the
ghosts are a little
destabilized, and I found
you could kind of do that
through the form
of the thing.
JEFFREY BROWN: Just to make it
clear to our
audience, there's no one
narrator.
It's all of these voices which
you are assembling,
including snippets from and
quotations from
real historians and some made-up
historians.
GEORGE SAUNDERS: Right.
When I first heard the story
about Lincoln,
I -- it was so beautiful to me
and sorrowful
and gorgeous, that I -- my
mantra was kind
of just make the ending so --
make the book
so weird and beautiful, that it
would do some
justice to that emotional core.
So, along the way, that was a
great mantra
to kind of say, does this
decision lead to
the direction of emotional power
or not?
And so the strange thing was,
following those
bread crumbs, I looked up about
a third of
the way in, and it had this
crazy form, and
very fun and gratifying.
JEFFREY BROWN: It raised the
question for
me just about, almost, what is a
novel?
GEORGE SAUNDERS: Well, somebody
told me is
a novel is a long work of prose
that has something
wrong with it.
So, I think, by that...
(LAUGHTER)
GEORGE SAUNDERS: ... standard,
it qualifies.
I never -- I wanted to write a
novel.
This particular material was so
insistent.
And I really kept a close eye on
it, like,
don't be a novel unless you have
to.
And at some point, it really
convinced me
that it deserved the length.
JEFFREY BROWN: And it makes me
wonder, did
you feel you had to sort of play
with the
form of a novel, or you -- you
just couldn't
write a straightforward
narrative?
GEORGE SAUNDERS: I couldn't
write a straightforward
narrative.
And I couldn't write a brief
But, again, I would have.
I have been happy to do all of
that.
But it's kind of strange.
My artistic approach is that
you're supposed
to be a little baffled as you're
writing.
And...
JEFFREY BROWN: You, the writer?
GEORGE SAUNDERS: Yes.
The holiest state is to be a
little confused
about what you're doing.
And you're guiding by the energy
that the
story is actually giving you as
you revise.
That's kind of tricky, because
it means you
have to abandon your ideas about
organization
or thematics, and really submit
to the story,
just as if it was a friend kind
of trying
to convince you of something.
So, if you do that, sometimes,
it takes you
-- it asks you to do really
crazy things.
And, for me, that's the thrill
of it, is to
say, OK, I will try it.
And then, hopefully, it will
result in some
kind of new mode of beauty.
JEFFREY BROWN: And, at some
point, you're
no longer confused by what
you're doing?
It never stops?
GEORGE SAUNDERS: I'm still
confused, because,
hopefully, the book is doing
things that you
didn't consciously plan.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, at the core
of this is
this figure, Abraham Lincoln,
probably the
most written of personage in
American history,
right?
You come at him through angles,
the voices
of the ghosts observing him, his
son, the
historians.
Was that because you couldn't
get a grasp
of him, or you didn't want to?
GEORGE SAUNDERS: It scared me to
try.
And, also, I was a little bit
afraid of coming
with all that conventional
wisdom about him.
And, at one point, I thought,
you know, actually,
I don't want to write a book
about Lincoln.
There's -- I don't claim to know
him, but
I needed him, the father who's
so grief-stricken,
he goes to see his dead son's
body.
JEFFREY BROWN: This is Abraham
Lincoln at
a moment of tremendous personal
grief, but
also surrounded by the Civil War
and the grief
of so many who will die, right?
GEORGE SAUNDERS: Yes.
Right, right.
It was actually a wonderful
chance to hang
out with him for four years.
You see a president who really
made a virtue
of things like sorrow, of being
defeated,
because he had setback after
setback.
He has this great loss.
And, somehow, he was able to
transform all
that sorrow into a kind of
expanding empathy
for everybody, you know?
It was kind of inspiring to see
somebody whose
response to fear or hardship was
expansiveness,
instead of shrinkage.
JEFFREY BROWN: The new novel is
"Lincoln in
the Bardo."
George Saunders, thank you very
much.
GEORGE SAUNDERS: Thank you so
JUDY WOODRUFF: Later this
evening on PBS:
bringing those responsible for
war crimes
to justice.
"Dead Reckoning" follows war
crimes investigators
and prosecutors as they pursue
some of the
world's most notorious war
criminals from
World War II through the modern
war on terrorism.
And that is the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Wednesday, we begin our
series "War on
the Brain," reports over three
nights by Soledad
O'Brien on the efforts to treat,
diagnose
and possibly find a cure to
post-traumatic
stress disorder -- "War on the
Brain" online
and on air over the next three
days.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.